# comuts_flu
Code and data for the paper "Detection of co-occurring and sequential mutation patterns of influenza virus A/H1N1, A/H3N2 and B viruses" 

Abstract

Motivation: Amino acid mutations on one site can neutralize or enhance the effects of the other site(s) and affect the protein function. The rapid evolution of influenza has limited the efficacy of the vaccine. A problem that has been drawing much attention is to identify mutations which contribute to the overall fitness of influenza viruses. Traditional experimental assays to measure the effect of site mutations and viral fitness are costly. Given the enriched viral sequence datasets, the alternative by constructing computational models to detect mutation patterns is a more favorable approach for screening, providing clues for site-directed mutagenesis to identify how the mutation hinders or contributes to viral evolution. Furthermore, most of the researches focus on the HA mutations and their contribution to the antigenic evolution of influenza. Evidence has shown that co-mutations also exist on other segments. Therefore, we analyzed the mutation patterns of all proteins in influenza viruses.

Results: We integrated association rule mining with time-constraints to explore the co-occurring and sequential mutations. The method was applied to all proteins of influenza A/H1N1, A/H3N2, and B viruses. In our observation, co-occurring and sequential mutation sites within a protein tend to locate in a functional domain. However, the mutation patterns of a protein are distinct in different subtypes of influenza. In this study, we detected a cluster of mutations on the PB2 locating at the regions binding with both NP and PB1.  For the HA protein, most of our detected mutations locate in the epitopes.  A mutation at the signal peptide is likely to have contributed the mutations on the epitope domain. The mutation D2E on NS1 co-occurs with E125D. Together they may have enhanced DNA binding and endonuclease activity of the viruses. Although the HA discriminates human influenza B viruses into different lineages, we observed the B/Yamagata lineage shares a similar HA mutation pattern with the whole human influenza B population. Last but not least, our proposed method is also applicable to analyzing inter-protein co-mutations. We highlighted that mutations N369K on the NA protein, S185T, and S451N on the HA protein play an essential role in regulating the immune recognition process.
